
Asymptotic Analysis and Consistency
===================================

**February 2017**

In this notebook we discuss the asymptotic properties of decision rules.
After a general introduction we restrict attention to empirical loss
minimizing decision rules, establish sufficient conditions for
consistency to hold and discuss the rate at which the convergence takes
place.

-  Consistency of a decision rule states that the corresponding
   empirical loss converges to the true loss in probability as the
   sample size grows to infinity.
-  In the case of empirical loss minimization, consistency is tightly
   linked to the uniform law of large numbers that we present in detail.
-  We introduce tail and concentration bounds to establish the uniform
   law of large numbers and analyze the (non-asymptotic) rate at which
   the convergence takes place.

Introduction
------------

Knowing the true mechanism :math:`P`, while one faces a decision problem
:math:`(\mathcal{H},L,\mathcal{A})`, naturally leads to the best in
class action :math:`a^{*}_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}` as the optimal action
within the prespecified class :math:`\mathcal{A}`. Although in reality
we do not know :math:`P`, it is illuminating to consider this case first
as we naturally require that at least with a sufficiently large (in
fact, infinite) sample, the true mechanism---from a statistical point of
view---can be revealed. The property that guarantees this outcome is the
ergodicity of the assumed statistical models.

This argument suggests to use the best in class action,
:math:`a^{*}_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}`, as the optimal large sample solution.
In other words, from any sensible decision rule a minimal property to
require is that as the sample size grows, the distribution of the
decision rule converges to a degenerate distribution concentrated at the
point :math:`a^{*}_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}`.

As an example, consider again the MLE estimator in the coin tossing
problem for which the above property is satisfied. The following figure
represents how the different confidence bands associated with the
induced action distribution evolve as the sample size goes to infinity.
Apparently, for sufficiently large sample sizes, the confidence bands
concentrate around the true value, which, due to the correct
specification is equivalent to the best in class action.

.. figure:: ./asymptotic_cointoss_consistency.png
   :alt: 

This property of the decision rule is called **consistency**. One of the
main objectives of this notebook is to investigate the conditions under
which it can be established.

Given that asymptotically the true :math:`P` can be learned, a natural
question to ask is why not to set :math:`\mathcal{A}` large enough so as
to guarantee :math:`\gamma(P)\in\mathcal{A}`, i.e. a correctly specified
model. We will see the sense in which requiring consisteny ties our
hands in terms of the "size" of :math:`\mathcal{A}`.

Although it is hard to provide generally applicable sufficient
conditions for consistency, roughly speaking, we can identify two big
classes of decision rules for which powerful results are available.

-  Bayes decision rules
-  Frequentist decision rules building on the empirical distribution
   :math:`P_n`, where

.. math:: P_n(z) : = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^{n} \mathbf{1}\{Z_i \leq z\}

and :math:`\mathbf{1}\{ A \}` is the indicator function of the set
:math:`A`.

In this notebook we will focus exclusively on the latter approach
considering decision rules that assign actions by minimizing the
empirical analog of the population loss. Hence, the procedure is
labelled by the name: **empirical loss minimization** or **analog
estimation**.

--------------

Consistency of decision rules
-----------------------------

To start out our asymptotic inquiry, we first define consistency in a
more precise manner than we did before. There are two, slightly
different notions depending on the tractability and objectives of the
decision problem at hand.

-  **Consistency in terms of the loss function:** a decision rule
   :math:`d: \mathcal{S} \mapsto \mathcal{A}` is consistent in terms of
   the loss function relative to :math:`(\mathcal{H}, \mathcal{A})`, if
   for all :math:`P \in \mathcal{H}`,

.. math:: L(P, d(Z^n)) \ \ \underset{n \to \infty}{\overset{\text{P}}{\rightarrow}} \ \ \inf_{a \in \mathcal{A}}L(P, a) = L\left(P, a^{*}_{L, P,\mathcal{A}}\right).

-  **Consistency in terms of the action:** a decision rule
   :math:`d: \mathcal{S} \mapsto \mathcal{A}` is consistent in terms of
   the action relative to :math:`(\mathcal{H}, \mathcal{A})`, if for all
   :math:`P \in \mathcal{H}`,

   .. math:: m\left(d\left(Z^n\right), a^*_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}\right) \ \ \underset{n \to \infty}{\overset{\text{P}}{\rightarrow}} \ \ 0.

.. raw:: html

   <!---

   P\left\{z^{\infty} \big| \lim_{n \to \infty} m\left(d(z_n), a^*_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}\right) > \epsilon\right\} = 0 \quad \text{for} \quad \forall\epsilon>0,

   --->

where :math:`m(\cdot, \cdot)` is a metric on the action space
:math:`\mathcal{A}`. The necessary condition---in the case of analog
estimators---for this notion of consistency is the identifiability of
:math:`a^*_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}` that we define as follows:

**Identification:**

	:math:`a^*_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}` is identified relative to :math:`(P, \mathcal{A})` if :math:`a^*_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}` is the unique minimizer of :math:`L(P, \cdot)` over :math:`\mathcal{A}`.

	:math:`a^*_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}` is (uniformly) identified relative to :math:`(\mathcal{H}, \mathcal{A})` if it is identified relative to :math:`(P, \mathcal{A})` for all :math:`P\in\mathcal{H}`.

Under identification, the two notions of consistency are equivalent. As
the above definitions suggest, however, the former is more general to
the extent that it also allows for partially identified statistical
models. Unless otherwise noted, we will work with consistency in terms
of the loss function and call it simply *consistency*.

In the above definitions, the set of assumed statistical models
:math:`\mathcal{H}` plays a key role: it outlines the set of
distributions under which the particular notion of convergence is
required. Ideally, we want convergence under the true distribution,
however, because we do not know :math:`P`, the "robust" approach is to
be as agnostic as possible regarding :math:`\mathcal{H}`. The central
insight of statstical decision theory is to highlight that this approach
is not limitless: one needs to find a balance between
:math:`\mathcal{H}` and :math:`\mathcal{A}` to obtain decision rules
with favorable properties.

Consistency has strong implications for the risk functional in large
samples: the degenerate limiting distribution of the decision rule
implies that asymptotically the variability of the decision rule
vanishes and so

.. math::  R_{\infty}(P,d) := \lim_{n\to \infty} \ R_n(P, d) \overset{a.s.}{=} L\left(P, a^{*}_{L, P,\mathcal{A}}\right). 

--------------

Uniform law of large numbers
----------------------------

As mentioned before, in this notebook we are focusing on decision rules
arising from empirical loss minimization. The basic idea behind this
approach is to utilize the consistency definitions directly, but instead
of using the quantity :math:`L(P, a)` that we cannot actually evaluate,
subsitute the empirical distribution into the loss function and work
with the **empricial loss** :math:`L(P_n, a)` instead.

**REMARK:** The empirical loss is not defined, if :math:`P_n` is not in
the domain of :math:`L`---as is the case, for example, with
non-parametric density estimation. Then, one has to either extend the
domain of :math:`L` or map :math:`P_n` to the original domain of the
loss function :math:`L`. An excellent discussion can be found in [Manski-1988]_
.

Given that the loss function is continuous in its first argument, the
law of large numbers (LLN), accompanied with the continuous mapping
theorem, implies

.. math:: L(P_n, a) \ \ \underset{n \to \infty}{\overset{\text{P}}{\to}} \ \ L(P, a)

that is, for a *fixed action* :math:`a`, the emprical loss converges in
probability to the true loss as the sample size goes to infinity.
Notice, however, that consistency

-  is not a property of a given action, but a whole decision rule, more
   precisely, it is about the convergence of the sequence
   :math:`\{d(z^n)\}_{n\geq 1} \subseteq \mathcal{A}`
-  requires convergence to the *minimum* loss (within
   :math:`\mathcal{A}`) that we ought to take into account while
   generating decision rules

In the spirit of the analogy principle, decision rules minimizing the
*empirical loss* can be defined as follows

.. math:: d(z^n) := \arg\min_{a\in\mathcal{A}} L(P_n, a), \quad\quad\quad (1)

where the dependence on the sample is embodied by the empirical
distribution :math:`P_n`. The heuristic idea is that because
:math:`d(z^n)` minimizes :math:`L(P_n, \cdot)`, and :math:`P_n`
converges to :math:`P`, then "ideally" :math:`d(z^n)` should go to
:math:`a^{*}_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}`, the minimizer of :math:`L(P, a)`, as
the sample size grows to infinity.

What do we need to ensure this argument to hold? First, notice that the
standard law of large numbers is inadequate for this purpose. In order
to illustrate this, we turn now to a concept closely related to
empirical loss minimization: **generalization**.

Using the empirical loss as a substitute for the true loss while
determining the decision rule, a critical question is how much error do
we introduce with this approximation. The object of interest regarding
this question is the following quantity defined for a given action
:math:`a` and realization of the sample :math:`z^n`

.. math:: \xi(a, z^n) = \left| L(P_n, a) - L(P, a) \right|.

We say that the action :math:`a` *generalizes well from a given sample*
:math:`z^n`, if the corresponding :math:`\xi(a, z^n)` is small. Taking
the absolute value is important: :math:`L(P_n, a)` can easily be smaller
than :math:`L(P, a)` as it is in the case of overfitting.

Due to :math:`P_n`'s dependence on the particular sample, however, the
quantity :math:`\xi(a, \cdot)` is a random variable. It might be small
for a given sample :math:`z^n`, but what we really need in order to
justify the method of empricial loss minimization is that :math:`\xi` is
small for "most samples", or more precisely

.. math:: P\left(z^n : \left| L(P_n, a) - L(P, a) \right| > \delta \right) \quad \text{is small.}

Since :math:`L` is continuous in its first argument and
:math:`P_n \to P`, this so called **tail probability** converges to zero
for any fixed :math:`a\in\mathcal{A}`. The figure below displays such
tail probabilities for the MLE estimator in the coin tossing example
(with quadratic loss) for different actions as functions of the sample
size.

One can see that even though the tail probabilities converge to
:math:`0` for all :math:`a\in\mathcal{A}`, the *rate of convergence*
depends on the particular :math:`a`. In other words,
:math:`\forall \varepsilon>0` and :math:`\forall a\in\mathcal{A}`, there
is an *action dependent* minimum sample size
:math:`N(a, \varepsilon, \delta)` (represented by the vertical solid
lines) that we need in order to guarantee that the tail probability
falls below :math:`\varepsilon`.

.. figure:: ./asymptotic_cointoss_tail.png
   :alt: 

Suppose now that we have a decision rule and look at its induced
sequence of actions :math:`\{a_n\}_{n\geq 1}\subset \mathcal{A}` for a
fixed realization :math:`z^{\infty}`. Again, for consistency, we need
the associated sequence of tail probabilities converging to zero for
"most :math:`z^{\infty}`".

-  When the set :math:`\mathcal{A}` has finitely many elements, this is
   not a problem: we can simply define

.. math::  N(\varepsilon, \delta) : = \max_{a\in\mathcal{A}} N(a, \varepsilon, \delta) 

and observe that for all :math:`n\geq N(\varepsilon, \delta)`, the tail
probabilities are smaller than :math:`\varepsilon`, for all
:math:`a\in \{a_n\}_{n\geq 1} \subseteq \mathcal{A}`.

-  However, because the critical sample size
   :math:`N(a, \varepsilon, \delta)` depends on the action, if
   :math:`\mathcal{A}` is "too big", it is possible that there is no
   :math:`n` so that :math:`n > N(a_n, \varepsilon, \delta)`, hence
   :math:`L(P_n, a_n)` may never approach :math:`L(P, a_n)`.

A possible approach to avoid this complication is to require the
existence of an integer :math:`N(\varepsilon, \delta)` *independent of*
:math:`a`, such that for all sample sizes larger than
:math:`N(\epsilon, \delta)`

.. math::  \sup_{a \in\mathcal{A}} \left| L(P_n, a) - L(P, a) \right| \ \overset{\text{P}}{\to} \ 0. 

This notion is called the **uniform law of large numbers** referring to
the fact that the convergence is guaranteed simultaneously for all
actions in :math:`\mathcal{A}`.

--------------

A special case -- plug-in estimators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are special cases where we do not need to worry about uniformity.
When the true loss function has a minimizer
:math:`a^{*}_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}` that admits a closed form in the sense
that it can be expressed as a continuous function of :math:`P`, the
empirical loss minimizer is simply a sample analog of
:math:`a^{*}_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}`. Effectively, there is no need to
explicitly minimize the emprical loss, so in spirit, it is as if we kept
a particular action fixed. In these cases the standard LLN is sufficient
to establish consistency.

-  *Sample mean:*

   Consider the quadratic loss function with the feature
   :math:`\gamma(P) = E[Z]`, i.e. the loss is
   :math:`L(P,a) = E[(a - E[Z])^2]`. Evidently, the minimizer of this
   quantity is :math:`E[Z]`. Although we could proceed by minimizing the
   empricial loss to derive the decision rule, we do not need to do
   that, because we know up front that it is equal to the sample analog
   of :math:`E[Z]`. The decision rule is the plug-in estimator
   :math:`d(z^n) = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^{n}z_i`.

-  *OLS estimator:*

   Suppose that :math:`Z=(Y, X)` and consider the quadratic loss
   :math:`L(P, a) = E[(Y-a)^2 | X]`, where :math:`E[\cdot | X]` is the
   expectation operator conditioned on :math:`X`. Assume that
   :math:`(Y, X)` follows a multivariate normal distribution, then the
   minimizer of :math:`L` is given by
   :math:`a = E\left[(X'X)^{-1}\right]E[X'Y]`. Consequently, there is no
   need for explicit minimization, we can use the least squares
   estimator as a plug-in estimator for :math:`a`.

More generally, as the empirical loss minimizer is itself a functional,
if the :math:`\min` functional can be shown to be continuous on the
space of empirical loss functions, i.e. the functional

.. math:: f : L(P_n, \cdot) \mapsto \mathbb{R}, \quad \text{s.t.}\quad\quad f(P_n) = \min_{a\in\mathcal{A}} \ L(P_n, a)

is continuous, then an application of the continuous mapping theorem
together with the Glivenko-Cantelli theorem (i.e.
:math:`\lVert P_n - P \rVert_{\infty} \to 0`) would yield consistency.
For reference, see [vdVaart-2000]_.

--------------

Uniform law of large numbers and consistency
--------------------------------------------

In more general nonlinear models, however,
:math:`a^{*}_{L, P, \mathcal{A}}` has no analytical form, so we cannot
avoid minimizing the empirical loss in order to derive the decision
rule. In these cases, guaranteeing the validity of uniform convergence
becomes essential. In fact, it can be shown that consistency of any
decision rule that we derive by minimizing some empirical loss function,
is *equivalent with* the uniform LLN.

**Theorem.** [Vapnik-Chervonenkis-1971]_: Uniform
convergence

.. math::  \lim_{n\to \infty} P\left\{\sup_{a \in\mathcal{A}} \left| L(P_n, a) - L(P, a) \right| < \varepsilon\right\}= 1 

for all :math:`\varepsilon >0` is *necessary and sufficient* for
consistency of decision rules arising from empirical loss minimization
over :math:`\mathcal{A}`.

Although this characterization of consistency is theoretically
intriguing, it is not all that useful in practice unless we find
easy-to-check conditions which ensure uniform convergence of empirical
loss over a particular function class :math:`\mathcal{A}`. As a
preparation to discuss these conditions, introduce first some notation

Almost all loss functions used in practice can be cast in the following
form. There exist

-  :math:`l : \mathcal{A}\times \mathbb{R}^d \mapsto \mathbb{R}^{m}` and
-  a *continuous* :math:`r : \mathbb{R}^{m} \mapsto \mathbb{R}_+` such
   that

.. math::  L(P, a) = r\left( \int_Z l(a, z)dP (z)\right).

Continuity of :math:`r` implies that in order to establish consistency
it is enough to investigate the properties of the limit

.. math::  \sup_{a\in\mathcal{A}} \left| \int_Z l(a, z)dP_n (z) - \int_Z l(a, z)dP(z)\right|  \ \  \overset{\text{P}}{\to} \ \  0 .

Formally, this requires that the class of functions
:math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}:= \left\{l(a, \cdot) : a \in \mathcal{A} \right\}`
is a **Glivenko-Cantelli class** for :math:`P`.

--------------

**Definition (Glivenko-Cantelli class):** Let :math:`\mathcal{G}` be a
class of integrable real-valued functions of the random variable
:math:`Z` having distribution :math:`P`. Consider the random variable

.. math::  \Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}} : = \sup_{g\in\mathcal{G}} \left| P_n g - Pg \right| 

We say that :math:`\mathcal{G}` is a Glivenko-Cantelli class for
:math:`P`, if :math:`\Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}}` converges to
zero in probability as :math:`n\to\infty`.

--------------

The usefulness of this formulation comes from the fact that it allows us
to bring to bear powerful techniques from empirical process theory
[Pollard-1984]_. This is because the random variable

.. math:: \left| \int_Z l(a, z)dP_n (z) - \int_Z l(a, z)dP(z)\right|

can be considered as an **empirical process** indexed by the function
class :math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}`. For each action :math:`a`, let
:math:`l_a:=l(a, \cdot)` and note that :math:`l_a` is a function of the
random variable :math:`Z`. Using typical notation of the empirical
process literature, we can rewrite the above absolute difference as

.. math:: \left\{\left|P_n l_a - P l_a\right|\right\}_{l_a\in\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}}.

Notice that :math:`P_n l_a` is a random variable because the empirical
distribution is a function of the random sample, while :math:`Pl_a` is
just the expectation of :math:`l_a` and so it is a non-random scalar.

.. raw:: html

   <!---
   A useful decomposition highlights the importance of the uniform law of large numbers in the case of empirical loss minimization. We would like to know the difference between the true loss of our estimator and the true loss of the best in class action. For a given sample $z^n$ denote the analog estimate as $\hat{a} = d(z^n)$ and the best in class action as $a^*$.

   $$ Pl_{\hat{a}} - Pl_{a^*} = (Pl_{\hat{a}} - P_n l_{\hat{a}}) + (P_n l_{\hat{a}} - P_n l_{a^*})  + (P_n l_{a^*} - P l_{a^*}) $$

   The last term on the right hand side is governed by the Law of Large Numbers, the middle term is necessarily weakly positive by definition of the empirical loss minimizing decision rule, and the first term is governed by the Uniform Law of Large Numbers. Hence, if we want to control the excess risk -- the left hand side -- then we necessarily have to control the right hand side.
   --->

Sufficient conditions for ULLN
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Variables of the form :math:`\Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}}` are
ubiquitos in statistics and econometrics and there are well-known
sufficient conditions that guarantee its convergence.

For parametric estimation, probably the most widely used (at least in
econometrics) sufficient condition includes the following three
assumptions (or some form thereof). Suppose that the action space
:math:`\mathcal{A}` is indexed by a finite dimensional vector
:math:`\theta\in\Theta \subset \mathbb{R}^{p}`. If

-  :math:`\Theta` is *compact*
-  :math:`l(\theta, z)` is a function such that :math:`l(\cdot, z)` is
   *continuous* on :math:`\Theta` with probability one
-  :math:`l(\theta, z)` is *dominated* by a function :math:`B(z)`, i.e.
   :math:`|l(\theta, z)|\leq B(z)` for all :math:`\theta\in\Theta`, such
   that :math:`\mathbb{E}[B(Z)]<\infty`

then
:math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}} := \left\{l(a, \cdot) : a \in \mathcal{A} \right\}`
is a Glivenko-Cantelli class for :math:`P` and so the estimator that it
represents is consistent. Among others, these assumptions are the bases
for consistency of the (Quasi-)Maximum Likelihood [White-1994]_ and the Generalized Method of Moments estimators
[Hansen-1982]_.

A somewhat different approach focuses on the "effective size" of the
class :math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}` and frames sufficient conditions
in terms of particular complexity measures such as the *Rademacher
complexity*, *Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension*, *covering/packing
numbers*, etc. The idea is to find tail bounds for the probability that
:math:`\Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}}` deviates
substantially above the complexity of :math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}`.
In the following section we present the main ideas behind the derivation
of non-asymptotic tail bounds.

**An interesting necessary condition:** If
:math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}` is a collection of indicator functions
and the data generating process is assumed to be i.i.d., a *necessary*
and sufficient condition for distribution free uniform convergence is
that the Vapnik-Chervonenkis complexity of
:math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}` is finite.

--------------

Non-asymptotic bounds
---------------------

As we have seen above, one way to establish consistency for analog
estimators is to require uniform convergence of the empirical loss to
the true loss over the entire action space, i.e. guarantee that the
uniform law of large numbers holds. This section presents an approach to
the laws of large numbers (uniform or "standard") building on a finite
sample perspective.

We study the concentration of centered averages around their means for
different finite sample sizes. More generally, we want results of the
form

.. math:: P\left(z^n \ : \ \left|g(z^n) - E[g(z^n)]\right| \geq \delta_n\right) \leq \varepsilon\quad\text{with}\quad\delta_n \to 0

OR

.. math:: P\left( z^n \ : \ \left|g(z^n) - E[g(z^n)]\right| \geq \delta\right) \leq \varepsilon_n\quad\text{with}\quad\varepsilon_n \to 0

Such results are known as **concentration inequalities**. Ensuring that
the centered average goes to a degenerate distribution on its
mean---"perfectly" concentrates around it---establishes the law of large
numbers. Moreover, studying concentration and tail bounds has the
advantage that we obtain approximate rates of convergence as a
byproduct. These rates of convergence will give us information regarding
the minimum sample size above which generalization from the empricial
loss to the true loss is justified.

First, we study how the concentration inequalities work for a single
random variable. This is going to parallel the law of large numbers.
Second, we study concentration inequalities applicable uniformly over a
class of random variables, i.e. *uniform bounds* of the form

.. math:: P\left(z^n \ : \ \sup_{g\in\mathcal{G}} \ \left|g(z^n) - E[g(z^n)]\right| \geq \delta_n\right) \leq \varepsilon\quad\text{with}\quad\delta_n \to 0

over a class of functions :math:`\mathcal{G}`. This is going to parallel
the uniform law of large numbers. For ease of notation we present the
results for a general class of measurable functions
:math:`g \in \mathcal{G}` -- but remember that in almost all
applications we will substitute it for
:math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}`.

This section builds on the material in [Wasserman-2016]_ and [Bousquet-2004]_.

.. raw:: html

   <!---
   Throughout this section we should keep in mind the characterization of consistency in the case of analog estimators. This was equivalent to uniform convergence which we repeat here

   $$ P\left( \sup_{a\in\mathcal{A}} \left| \int_Z l(a, z)dP_n (z) - \int_Z l(a, z)dP(z)\right| > \varepsilon \right) \quad  \underset{n \to \infty}{\to} \quad  0 \quad\quad \forall \varepsilon > 0. $$

   For each action the loss is a just a (measurable) function of the random variable $Z$, $l_a(Z):=l(a, Z)$. 
   --->

Markov's inequality
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Markov's inequality states that for any non-negative scalar random
variable :math:`Z` and :math:`t>0` we have

.. math::  P\{Z \geq t\}\leq \frac{\mathbb{E}[Z]}{t}. 

The idea behind this inequality is fairly simple and in fact it follows
from the following obvious inequality

.. math::  \mathbf{1}\{Z\geq t\}\leq \frac{Z}{t} 

illustrated by the figure below. Clearly, *for any probability measure*
:math:`P` over :math:`Z` with a finite first moment Markov's inequality
can be established.

.. figure:: ./asymptotic_markov_chebyshev.png
   :alt: 

It follows from Markov's inequality that for any strictly monotonically
increasing non-negative function :math:`\phi` and any random variable
:math:`Z` (not necessarily non-negative) we have that

.. math::  P\{Z \geq t\} = P\{\phi(Z) \geq \phi(t)\} \leq \frac{\mathbb{E}[\phi(Z)]}{\phi(t)}. 

Taking the centered random variable :math:`| Z - \mathbb{E}[Z]|` and
:math:`\phi(x) = x^q` for some :math:`q>0` leads to tail bounds
expressed in terms of the moments of :math:`Z`.

.. math::  P\{| Z - \mathbb{E}[Z]| \geq t\} \leq \frac{\mathbb{E}[| Z - \mathbb{E}[Z]|^q]}{t^q}. 

Note that for :math:`q = 2`, this form delivers the **Chebyshev
inequality** (see the right panel of the Figure). This approach to
bounding tail probabilities for a wide range of possible :math:`P` is
quite general. Controlling higher order moments--restricting
:math:`\mathcal{H}`, i.e. the range of probabilities to which the
inequality holds--leads to (weakly) tighter bounds on the tail
probabilities.

Chernoff bounds
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A related idea is at the core of the so called Chernoff bound. For that
one takes the transformation :math:`\phi(x) = e^{\lambda x}` applied to
the centered random variable :math:`(Z - \mathbb{E}[Z])` which yields

.. math::  P\{(Z - \mathbb{E}[Z]) \geq t\} \leq \frac{\mathbb{E}\left[e^{\lambda(Z - \mathbb{E}[Z])}\right]}{e^{\lambda t}}. 

Minimizing the bound over :math:`\lambda` (provided the moments exist)
would lead us to the Chernoff bound

.. math::  \log P\{(Z - \mathbb{E}[Z]) \geq t\} \leq - \sup_{\lambda} \left\{\lambda t - \log \mathbb{E}\left[e^{\lambda(Z - \mathbb{E}[Z])}\right]\right\}.

If the centered random variable is an iid sum of other random variables,
the Chernoff bound gains additional structure.

Hoeffding bounds
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Suppose first that the sample :math:`z^n` is generated by an iid process
and recall that

.. math:: P_n g - P g = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)] = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n \left(g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)]\right).

Bounding the tails via Chernoff's method yields

.. math::  P\left\{\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n \left(g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)]\right) \geq t\right\} \leq \frac{\mathbb{E}\left[e^{\lambda \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n \left(g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)]\right)}\right]}{e^{\lambda t}} = e^{-\lambda t} \prod_{i=1}^n \mathbb{E}\left[e^{\lambda \frac{1}{n}\left(g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)] \right)} \right] 

where the equality follows from independece. Hence, the problem of
deriving a tight bound boils down to bounding the moment generating
function of

.. math::  \frac{1}{n}\left(g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)] \right). 

For obtaining bounds of moment generating functions, a particularly
important class of random variables are the so called **sub-Gaussian
variables**.

**Definition.** A random variable :math:`Z` is called sub-Gaussian if
there is a positive number :math:`\sigma` such that for all
:math:`\lambda \in \mathbb{R}`

.. math::  \mathbb{E}\left[e^{\lambda \left(Z - \mathbb{E}[Z] \right)} \right] \leq e^{\sigma^2\lambda^2/2}

**REMARK:**: A Guassian variable with variance :math:`\sigma^2` is
sub-Gaussian with parameter :math:`\sigma`. There are other non-Guassian
random variables which are sub-Gaussian -- for example all bounded
random variables.

The property of sub-Gaussianity is preserved by linear operations, which
leads to the following important result

**Theorem.** (Hoeffding) Let the variables :math:`g(Z_i)` be iid and
sub-Gaussian with parameter :math:`\sigma`. Then, for all :math:`t>0` we
have that

.. math:: P\left\{\left|\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)]\right| \geq t\right\} \leq 2\exp\left\{-\frac{t^2 n}{2\sigma^2}\right\}.

For a single random variable :math:`g(Z)`, we see how the Hoeffding
inequality is at the core of the law of large numbers. As :math:`n` goes
to infinity, the upper bound on the right goes to zero implying that the
probability on the left must go to zero as well *for all* :math:`P` that
makes :math:`g(Z)` sub-Gaussian. In fact, further inspection reveals
that the upper bound also provides an exponential rate of convergence:
:math:`t^2/(2\sigma^2)`

However, in order to talk about concentration properties of decision
rules, :math:`d: \mathcal{S}\mapsto\mathcal{A}` we need bounds for tail
probabilities applicable uniformly over the whole action space or
alternatively, uniformly across :math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}`. This
consideration leads us to uniform bounds.

--------------

Uniform Tail and Concentration Bounds for classes of finite cardinality
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

As a first simple example we consider uniform tail bounds over sets of
finite cardinality. Let
:math:`\mathcal{G} = \{g_j : j = 1, \ldots, J\}`. A conservative
estimate of the uniform tail bound in this case is the union bound.

**Corollary.** (Hoeffding union bound) Let the variables
:math:`\{g_j(Z_i): j=1,\ldots, J\}` be iid and sub-Gaussian with common
parameter :math:`\sigma`. Then, for all :math:`t > 0` we have

.. math::  P\left\{\sup_{g\in\mathcal{G}}\left| \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n g(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g(Z)]\right| \geq t \right\} \leq \sum_{j = 1}^{J} P\left\{\left|\frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n g_j(Z_i) - \mathbb{E}[g_j(Z)]\right| \geq t \right\} \leq J 2\exp\left\{-\frac{t^2 n}{2\sigma^2}\right\}. 

The difference between the uniform and individual Hoeffding bounds is
just a scaling factor, :math:`J`. If there is only finitely many actions
in :math:`\mathcal{A}`, then of course the function class
:math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}` has finite cardinality. Our objective,
however, is to extend the above analysis to action spaces with infinite
cardinality. To this end, we need to find a better "measure" of the size
of a function space than its cardinality. Next, we introduce one such
complexity measure which proves to be extremely useful in the case of
characterizing tail bounds for analog estimators.

Uniform tail bounds for classes of infinite cardinality - Rademacher complexity
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In order to work with sets of infinitely many functions we would like to
capture the size of these infinite sets for the purpose of statistical
analysis. One such measure of statistical size is the Rademacher
complexity of a class of real-valued functions.

For a given realization of a sample, :math:`z^n`, of size :math:`n`
consider the the set of vectors

.. math:: \mathcal{G}(z^n) := \left\{ (g(z_1), \ldots, g(z_n)) \in \mathbb{R}^n \mid g \in \mathcal{G} \right\}.

This embodies the number of ways one can label points of a sample using
functions in the class :math:`\mathcal{G}`. It is often called the
projection of the function class :math:`\mathcal{G}` to the sample
:math:`z^n`. The **empirical Rademacher complexity of**
:math:`\mathcal{G}` for fixed :math:`z^n` is defined as

.. math:: \mathsf{R} \left(\mathcal{G}(z^n) \right) := \mathbb{E}_{\epsilon}\left[\sup_{g\in \mathcal{G}}\Big| \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n \epsilon_i g(z_i) \Big| \right],

where the expectation is taken with respect to the iid **Rademacher
random variables**, :math:`\epsilon_i` which take value in
:math:`\{-1, 1\}` with equal probability.

The **Rademacher complexity of** :math:`\mathcal{L}` for sample size
:math:`n` is then defined as

.. math:: \mathsf{R}\left(\mathcal{G}, n\right) := \mathbb{E}_{Z^n} \Big[\mathsf{R}\left(\mathcal{G}(z^n) \right)\Big].

where the expectations is taken with respect to the sample. Rademacher
complexity has an intuitive interpretation. It is the average (across
samples) of the maximum correlations between the vectors
:math:`\big(g(z_1), \ldots, g(z_n)\big)` and the pure noise vector
:math:`\big(\epsilon_1, \ldots, \epsilon_n\big)_{z^n}`. The function
class :math:`\mathcal{G}` is too "large" (complex) for statistical
purposes, if we can always choose a function, :math:`g\in\mathcal{G}`
that has high correlation with a randomly drawn noise vector, that is,
when the corresponding Rademacher complexity does not go to zero as the
sample size grows to infinity.

Illustration of Rademacher complexity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the following we consider two examples. Although both examples use a
function class that can be parametrized by a *single* free parameter, we
will see that one of them has drastically smaller Rademacher complexity
than the other.

**Coin tossing example revisited**

Consider again the coin tossing example with the quadratic loss function
discussed before. In this case :math:`Z^n` is an iid sample from a
Binomial distribution parametrized with :math:`\theta\in[0, 1]`. The
class of functions is given by the quadratic class

.. math::  \mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}} := \{l(a, \cdot) : l(a, z) = (z - a)^2, \ \  a \in [0, 1]\subseteq \mathbb{R}\}.

The following figure depicts the empricial Rademacher complexity
:math:`\mathsf{R} \left(\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}(z^n) \right)` along
alternative sample paths (on the left) and the Rademacher complexity
:math:`\mathsf{R}\left(\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}, n\right)` for
different sample sizes (on the right).

-  Clearly, both
   :math:`\mathsf{R} \left(\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}(z^n) \right)` and
   :math:`\mathsf{R}\left(\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}, n\right)` converge
   to zero as the sample size grows to infinity.
-  Rademacher complexity is nearly indistinguishable from Empirical
   Rademacher complexity and in fact, the latter does not show much
   variation across the different samples :math:`z^n` (several lines lie
   on top of each other). This suggests that in the simple example of
   coin tossing, the different ensemble samples (with more than 300 data
   points) encode very similar information about the complexity of the
   function class used in the estimation.

.. figure:: ./asymptotic_rademacher_cointoss.png
   :alt: 

**Sinusoid classification**

Consider next a classification problem, where the observable is
:math:`Z=(Y, X)` and assume that the binary random variable
:math:`Y`--taking values from :math:`\{-1, 1\}`--depends on the
covariate :math:`X` in some way. Suppose that a statistician uses the
following classifiers to cature this dependence

.. math::  \mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}} := \Big\{ \mathbb{1}\{\sin(ax) \geq 0\} - \mathbb{1}\{\sin(ax) < 0\} : a \in \mathbb{R}_+ \Big\}. 

That is, the classifier boundary is given by sine functions,
:math:`\sin(aX)`, parametrized by the frequency :math:`a`. For a given
:math:`a`, one can determine the range of covariate values for which
this classifier assigns the value :math:`1` or :math:`-1`. As a result,
choosing :math:`a\in\mathcal{A}` is equivalent with choosing particular
subsets of :math:`X`. To determine the optimal :math:`a` we use the
:math:`0/1` loss.

The following figure represents the empirical loss minimizing
classifiers for two random samples (depicted by the red dots) with
different sizes. In order to have a closed form solution for the optimal
classifier we are selecting the sample at convenient points. This is
without loss of generality and useful for illustrative purposes. The
shaded area indicates the ranges of :math:`X`, where the classifier
assigns :math:`1` or :math:`-1`.

-  As we can see, by choosing a sufficiently high frequency :math:`a` we
   can always find a curve which classifies the data perfectly, i.e. the
   in-sample predicitions are always "correct".
-  For better illustration, consider the empirical Rademacher complexity
   associated with the sample, :math:`z^n`, depicted by the red dots.
   Since :math:`\mathcal{L}_{\mathcal{A}}` is always able to perfectly
   separate the sample, the (empirical) Rademacher complexity always
   takes its maximum value (one) irrespective of the sample size.

.. figure:: ./asymptotic_rademacher_sinusoid.png
   :alt: 

Consequently, for statistical purposes the family of sine curves is too
complex. This example highlights that for general non-linear functions
the number of free parameters---here only one---does not correspond to
the complexity of the function class---which is infinity.

Uniform bounds using the Rademacher complexity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With the introduced concepts we are now capable to present an important
concentration inequality for classes of infinite cardinality.

**Theorem:** For uniformly bounded functions
:math:`\lvert g \rvert_{\infty} < B, \ \ \forall g \in\mathcal{G}` and
for each :math:`\eta>0` we have that

.. math::  P \Big\{ \Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}} \geq  2\mathsf{R}\left(\mathcal{G}, n\right) + \eta \Big\} \leq 2 \exp\Big\{- \frac{2 n \eta^2}{B^2} \Big\}. \quad\quad\quad(*)

and for the empirical Rademacher complexity

.. math::  P\Big\{ \Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}} \geq 2 \mathsf{R} \left(\mathcal{G}(z^n) \right) + \eta \Big\} \leq 2 \exp\Big\{-\frac{n \eta^2}{4 B^2} \Big\}. \quad\quad\quad(**) 

It is apparent from the above inequalities that the tightness of the
finite sample uniform bounds will be (partly) determined by the
Rademacher complexity. The change in Rademacher complexity as the sample
size grows will determine the (non-asymptotic) rate of convergence.
Hence, if :math:`R_n(\mathcal{G}) = o(1)` then
:math:`\Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}} \to 0` or put it differently,
:math:`\mathcal{G}` is a Glivenko-Cantelli class.

Notice that the second bound in :math:`(**)` is data dependent in the
sense that it includes only variables that in principle, we can
determine without knowing the true probability distribution.

Illustration of the tail bounds in the coin tossing example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An alternative way to express the uniform bounds is to specify a fixed
tail probability :math:`\varepsilon` and use the change of variable
:math:`\varepsilon = 2 \exp\left(- \frac{2 n \eta^2}{B^2}\right)` to
obtain

.. math::  P \left\{ \Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}} \geq  2\mathsf{R}\left(\mathcal{G}, n\right) + \sqrt{\frac{B^2}{2n}\log\left(\frac{2}{\varepsilon}\right)} \right\} \leq \varepsilon. 

This formulation of the bound is useful because it makes transparent the
sense in which it is uniform over the action space :math:`\mathcal{A}`.
Similarly, for fixed action :math:`a`, we can compute the sequence
:math:`\{\delta_n(a)\}_{n\geq 1}` that makes the following expression
true for all :math:`n`

.. math:: P \left\{ \left| L(P_n, a) - L(P, a)\right| \geq  \delta_n(a) \right\} \leq \varepsilon.

Note that conceptually this is the same exercise that we did for tail
probabilities above. The difference is that while there we fixed
:math:`\delta_n=\delta` for all :math:`n` and treated
:math:`\varepsilon` (tail probability) as sample size dependent, here,
we are switching the roles and investigating the implied
:math:`n`-dependent bounds for fixed tail probability
:math:`\varepsilon`.

The left panel of the following figure compares the uniform bound
derived from Rademacher complexity along with the
:math:`\{\delta_n(a)\}` sequences for different actions :math:`a` in the
coin-tossing example.

-  The bound expressed in terms of Rademacher complexity clearly
   dominates the absolute difference between the empirical and true loss
   for all actions.
-  We can see the sense in which the tail bound represents a
   *worst-case* viewpoint: by bounding the *supremum* of the difference
   between the empirical and true loss, one can be sure that
   generalization works uniformly well over the action space, but the
   bound is loose for most actions.

.. figure:: ./rademacher_tail_bound.png
   :alt: 

Calculation of the Rademacher complexity in :math:`(*)` requires the
knowledge of the true distribution. In this sense, inequality
:math:`(**)` provides a practically more useful bound. As we have seen
above, this inequality incorporates the Empirical Rademacher complexity
and uses a looser scaling factor in the upper bound. On the other hand,
this bound is *agnostic* in the sense that it is applicable for any true
distribution :math:`\theta\in[0,1]`, i.e. for any statistical model in
:math:`\mathcal{H}`. The right panel of the above figure demonstrates
this fact.

-  For fixed :math:`a`, different :math:`\theta` distributions induce
   different tail probabilities. The bound constructed from the
   Empirical Rademacher complexity works uniformly for all of such
   alternative true probabilities.
-  One might consider this bound as a result of a *worst-case* analysis
   taking into account both the action space :math:`\mathcal{A}` and the
   class of statistical models :math:`\mathcal{H}`.

Bounding expectations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Related strongly to the above tail bounds, one can also bound the
*expectation* of the supremum of an empirical process using Rademacher
complexity. This is often called **symmetrization inequality**.

**Theorem:** For any class of :math:`P`-integrable functon class
:math:`\mathcal{G}`, we have that

.. math:: \mathbb{E}_{Z^n}\Big[\Vert P_n - P \Vert_{\mathcal{G}} \Big] \leq 2\mathsf{R}\left(\mathcal{G}, n\right) = 2 \mathbb{E}_{Z^n}\Big[\mathsf{R} \left(\mathcal{G}(z^n) \right)\Big]. 

Unfortunately, computing the Rademacher complexity directly is only
feasible in special cases (see one example below). There are various
techniques however, which give bounds on the Rademacher complexity. For
different classes of functions different techniques prove to be useful,
so one usually proceeds on a case-by-case basis. The most common ways of
bounding the Rademacher complexity are via the **Vapnik-Chervonenkis
dimension** for binary functions and via **metric entropy** for bounded
real valued functions.

--------------

The code for the simulations and producing the graphs can be found
`here <https://github.com/QuantEcon/econometrics/blob/master/Notebook_02_asymptotics/asymptotic_analysis_code.ipynb>`__.

--------------

References
~~~~~~~~~~

.. [Bousquet-2004] Bousquet, O., Boucheron, S., & Lugosi, G. (2004). Introduction to statistical learning theory. In Advanced lectures on machine learning (pp. 169-207). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

.. [Vapnik-Chervonenkis-1971] Chervonenkis, A. and Vapnik, V. (1971). Theory of uniform convergence of frequencies of events to their probabilities and problems of search for an optimal solution from empirical data. Automation and Remote Control, 32, 207-217.

.. [Hansen-1982] Hansen, L. P. (1982). Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1029-1054.

.. [Manski-1988] Manski, Charles (1988). Analog estimation in econometrics. Chapman and Hall, London.

.. [Pollard-1984] Pollard, David (1984). Convergence of Stochastic Processes. Springer-Verlag.

.. [vdVaart-2000] Van der Vaart, A. W. (2000). Asymptotic statistics (Vol. 3). Cambridge University Press.

.. [Wasserman-2016] Wasserman, Larry (2016). Lecture notes for Statistical Machine Learning at CMU. `Link <http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~larry/=sml/>`__

.. [White-1994] White, Halbert (1994). Estimation, Inference and Specification Analysis (Econometric Society Monographs). Cambridge University Press.